# Client-side Encryption v1

The plugin uploads encrypted files to remote, download and decrypt back to local. The schema below aims to achieve similar encryption function as `rclone` but with higher security.

## Terminology

### Notations

- IV = Initialization Vector = Nonce
- B = Byte
- b = bit
- KiB = 1024B
- || = concatenate

### Threat Model & Constraints

- This algorithm assumes client devices share the same password. So no asymmetric encryption or credential sharing needed.
- This algorithm assumes zero trust on WebDAV server and transmission layer, it should prevent:
  - unauthorized access
  - unauthorized modification
- Only end clients are trusted.
- No central server to store salts or nonce, no extra meta file creation on WebDAV.
- Encrypted file names must be deterministic.
- Impossible or huge-cost-little-gain to achieve in this context:
  - prevent file being rolling back to previous version by malicious server
  - prevent file deletion by malicious server
  - obfuscate file size or modification time
  - obfuscate total file number
  - obfuscate remote root directory name
  - obfuscate file name equality (will be achieved in plugin v3)
  - obfuscate tree structure (will be achieved in plugin v3)

### Algorithms

- `SHA256`: generate deterministic and unique salt from user info to obtain _master key_.
- `Argon2id`: generate _master key_ from salt and user password, used every user info / password change.
- `HKDF-SHA-256`: derive _root file key_ and _file key_ from _master key_, and derive _file key_ from _root file key_ and _file salt_, used every sync.
- `CSPRNG`: (`crypto.getRandomValues()`) generate random _file salt_, used every file encryption
- `AES-GCM-256`: main algorithm used to encrypt file content, used every file encryption
- `AES-GCM-SIV-256`: algorithm used to encrypt file / folder names, used every file encryption
- `Base64URL`: transform binary data into ASCII for storage / display

### Keys & data structure

- _auth tag_: 16B, generated by `AES-GCM-256` to verify data integrity
- _master salt_: 16B, for salting user password to get _master key_, generated from `SHA256` on user info
- _master key_: 32B, deterministic strong key generated by `Argon2id` from user password and salt
- _name key_: 32B, derived from _master key_ used to encrypt file names
- _root file key_: 32B, derived from _master key_ used to generate _file key_ for each file
- _file key_: 32B, derived from _root file key_ and random _file salt_
- _file salt_: 16B, pure random, to derive _file key_ each time to encrypt or decrypt a file
- _file key salt_: 32B, `SHA256` of _file salt_ || file size in 12B || UTF-8 file path
- _chunk nonce_: 12B, chunk index represented in 12B.
- _encrypted file / folder name_: `Base64URL` of `AES-GCM-SIV` encrypted file name
- _encrypted file / folder path_: _encrypted file / folder name_ of all ancestor hierarchies joined by `/`.
- _file chunk_: 131,088B, 128KiB-chunked and `AES-GCM-256` encrypted piece of file (end chunk is smaller)
- _encrypted file content_: _file salt_ || all chunks sequentially

## Enabling and Disabling

The function is toggled via settings "Encryption" toggling. It allows users to set encryption password via Obsidian keychain, like WebDAV token. The toggle button triggers a modal informing users that:

- all subsequent uploads will be encrypted.
- ensure all devices have password and have "Encryption" enabled.
- please delete remote base directory entirely and re-upload the entire vault if their vault is uploaded before

## Sync Routine

On each sync, generate a promise to obtain _root file key_ and _name key_ that will be resolved and cached on demand:

- starting check: if found the user password is an empty string or undefined, throw directly
- generate _master salt_: `SHA256` of `<server URL>.<account name>.<remote base directory>` truncated to 16B.
- generate _master key_ using `Argon2id` with 32MB memory, 3 iterations, and 1 thread on the user password with _master salt_
- derive _root file key_ (info: `root-file-key-v1`, no salt) and _name key_ (info: `name-key-v1`, no salt) using `HKDF-SHA-256`
- resolve with _root file key_ and _name key_

Then come to the traversal and syncing logic:

- encryption should be isolated at the end site, directly in the push task and mkdir task
- decryption should happen immediately when the encrypted file touches local machine, directly during remote traversal, pull task, and `getRemoteContent`.
- assume all files are encrypted when "Encryption" is enabled, assume all plain when not enabled.

## File / Folder Path Encryption

- All paths should be represented in UTF-8 and normalized to Unicode NFC (current plugin logic already ensures this)
- Cascade and encrypt the whole path chain, for each file name (should be a standalone name like `bar`, `foo.md`):
  - use `AES-GCM-SIV-256` to encrypt file name with key: _name key_, content: file name, nonce: fixed at UTF-8 of `file-name-v1` in bytes.
  - obtain the final name using `Base64URL` on the result yielded above
- For example, when encrypting the full path of `foo/bar/a.md`, first encrypt `foo`, then `bar` folder, and finally `a.md`.
- Use a global in-memory cache to accelerate file path encryption / decryption for identical paths, limited to 10K entries.
- Do not encrypt user's remote root directory.

## File Encryption

- Input raw file, raw file size, and relative file path (uniformly `localPath` in this plugin)
- Generate random 16B _file salt_ via `CSPRNG`
- Calculate encrypted file size as `raw size + 16B + ceil(raw size / 128KiB) * 16B`
- Calculate _file key salt_ as `SHA256` of _file salt_ || encrypted file size in 12B || UTF-8 file path
- Calculate _file key_ using `HKDF-SHA-256` of _root file key_ (salt: _file key salt_, info: `file-key-v1`).
- Splice the file content into 128KiB chunks, special size for the last chunk, for each chunk:
  - get chunk index starting from 0 represented in 12B as _chunk nonce_
  - encrypt the 128KiB with _file key_ and _chunk nonce_ using `AES-GCM-256`
  - each chunk = ciphertext (128KiB = 131,072B) + auth tag (16B) = 131,088B
- Concatenate the file as: _file salt_ || all chunks sequentially

## One-pass Decryption

- Input encrypted file, encrypted size in bytes, and decrypted relative path
- Splice the first 16B as _file salt_
- Calculate _file key salt_ as `SHA256` of _file salt_ || encrypted file size in 12B || UTF-8 file path
- Calculate _file key_ using `HKDF-SHA-256` of _root file key_ (salt: _file key salt_, info: `file-key-v1`).
- Continue to splice into 131,088B pieces (exception for the last chunk), for each piece:
  - count _chunk index_ as _chunk nonce_
  - decrypt the chunk with _chunk nonce_ + _file key_ with `AES-GCM-256`, throw `data corrupted or wrong password` and skip the file if auth tag mismatch
- Concatenate decrypted content

## Streamed Decryption

Streamed decryption receives a `ReadableStream`, generates another `ReadableStream`, and pipe decrypts it between streams.

- Input the decrypted file path, encrypted size in bytes, and accept a sequential binary stream of the file content
- Split and concatenate the chunk internally
- For example, if the first received binary is 2,000,000B in size, the range decrypter:
  - strips first 16B as _file salt_
  - add up counter for each chunk and strip next 1966380B as 15 _completed chunks_
  - save the last 33604B as an _incomplete chunk_ and save to a buffer
  - decrypt the 15 _completed chunks_ as one-pass decryption
  - concatenate content, and pipe to new stream.
  - when next binary stream chunk arrives, it concatenates the content in the buffer with the first certain size of bytes in the new binary as the first _completed chunk_.
  - repeat until the original stream finishes, the class treats the rest content in its buffer as a _completed chunk_, decrypt directly, pipe to the new stream, then end it.

## File / Folder Name Decryption

- Input file name and `Base64URL` decode to raw bytes
- Decrypt the rest of the file name using `AES-GCM-SIV-256` with _name key_ and nonce (use the cache if possible)

## Implementation

The implementation should only use:

- Web Crypto
- `argon2id` export from `hash-wasm`
- `gcmsiv` export from `@noble/ciphers/aes.js`

The encryption function will be cleanly integrated as a wrapper class as a wrapper layer above [`RemoteFs`](./file-system.md):

`getUid()`, `checkConnection()`, `options`, `request`: keep as-is.

`read()`: encrypt key before relaying to original, and decrypt when original returns.

`readStream()`: encrypt key before relaying to original, creates a new stream that relay consumes the original stream.

`write()`: encrypt the key and the content before relying to original.

`delete()`, `mkdir()`, `stat()`: encrypt the key before relying to original.

`stat()`: encrypt the key before relaying, decrypt the `key` in `Stat` when original returns.

`list()`, `listAll()`: encrypt the key before relaying, decrypt the `key` in `Array<Stat>` when original returns.
